# Lecture 2: Relational Databases

1. It is stores in rows and columns
2. The major important part of this is relations.
3. ACID Properties
    - Atomicity
    - Consistency
    - Isolation
    - Durability
4. Indexes make reads faster but writes slower
5. We can write upsert instead of insert in db to update the row if it exists and insert if it doesn't.

## Locking (Pessimistic Locking)
1. Whenever we want to update a critical section, a thread acquires access to the critical section and then releases it after the update is done. It protects consistency and Integrity
2. ACQ_LOCK() -> CRITICAL_SECTION -> REL_LOCK()
3. There are two types of locking strategies:
    - Shared Locks
    - Exclusive Locks
4. Pesimistic Locking may lead to deadlocks.
5. Everytime you lock a row, the database runs a deadlock detection algorithm to check if there is a deadlock or not. If there is a deadlock, it will kill one of the transactions and release the locks.
6. Fixed Inventory + Contention = Locking
7. When the data is on disk, we need to do batch deletions, when the data is in memory, we can do pointed deletions.

### Shared Locks
1. These are called read locks
2. We can get a shared lock on a bunch of rows by adding `...  FOR SHARE;`. Whenever the db engine sees this, it allows the transaction to get a shared lock on the rows.
3. When a transaction has acquired a shared lock on a row, it can read the row, other transactions can also read the row but no transaction can write to the row.
4. Read lock gives high read throughput
5. The transaction that has acquired the shared lock can write to the row, but the lock will be upgraded to an exclusive lock. It happens implicitly. Any write transaction will be exclusive lock.

### Exclusive Locks
1. We can get a shared lock on a bunch of rows by adding `...  FOR UPDATE;`. This gives the transaction an exclusive lock on the rows.
2. No other transaction can read or write to the rows that have been locked by the transaction. When a transaction has to read a row that has been locked by another transaction, it will wait for the lock to be released, and once that lock is released, the transaction reevaluates the query and reads the row.
3. We can write `... FOR UPDATE NOWAIT;` to get an exclusive lock on the rows. If the rows are already locked, the transaction will fail. We need this since the transaction will wait indefinitely for the lock to be released.
4. We can write `... FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED;` to get an exclusive lock on the rows. If the rows are already locked, the transaction will skip the rows and continue.

## Redis
1. It is an in-memory key-value store.
2. It is used for caching, session management, and real-time analytics.
3. Delete in redis happen in two ways
    1. In memory deletion - when a key is fetched and its ttl is expired, it is deleted from memory then and there.
    2. Sampling - Redis has a background thread that samples the keys. It randomly picks 20 keys and checks if their ttl is expired. If it is, it deletes the key from memory. If the percentage of keys with expired ttl is more than 25%, it will repeat the process. This is called active-expiration.