# Strucure of the Network

## OSI Model
Open systems interconnected model
Standard way for 2 or more computers to connect to each other  
There are 7 layers
1. Application layer - User end application. HTTP other protocols
2. Presentation layer - It converts the data from app layer to machine understandable binary formaet. This is called translation. Data gets encrypted. It provides abstraction. Data is compressed. SSL is used
3. Session layer -  It helps in setting up connections and authorization. 
4. Transport layer - Transports the data. Segmentation used, it uses port number and sequence number for the packet. It takes care of flow control and error control as well. UDP and TCP used.
5. Network layer - Communicating with other networks. This is for router. Logical addressing is done. It forms an IP packet with senders and recievers IP address. It performs routing.
6. Data link layer - Physical addressing is done here. MAC address are added to data packet to form a frame.
7. Physical layer - Physical infrastructure and hardware for the communication. 

## TCP/IP Model
It is called Internet Protocol Suite.  
OSI is the theoretical approach. TCP/IP is the real application.  
It has only 5 Layers
1. Application layer - 
   1. Users interact with layer
   2. This has all the user end applications.
   3. Protocols - HTTP
2. Transport layer - TCP, UDP
3. Network layer  
4. Data Link layer
5. Physical layer  

## Application Layer

### Client Server Architecture 
Client sends a request, server sends a response. ping measures the round trip time from server to client. 

### Peer to Peer Architecture
No dedicated servers, scaling is very high, it is decentralized. Ever single computer is a client as well as a server.  


### Devices
1. Repeater - Regenerate signal over the same network before it becomes too weak. No amplification. 2 ports
2. Hub - Multi port repeater. Connected in star topology. Data packets are sent to all devices with no filtering.
3. Bridge - It can filter using mac address. It is a repeater
4. Switch - Multiport bridge with better efficiency.
5. Gateway - Connect two different networks together.
6. Brouter - It combines both bridge and router 

### Protocols 
1. HTTP 
2. DHCP - Allocates IP address to devices.
3. FTP - Not used anymore, done by HTTP
4. SMTP - Send emails
5. POP3 & IMAP - Recieve Mails
6. SSH
7. VNC - 
8. TELNET - Port 23
9. UDP - Stateless Connection

### Ports
**Sockets** - Interface bw process and the internet.  
**Ports** - IP address tells which device we are working with, port tells which application.   
**Ephemeral Ports** - It will assign itself random ports, and once the application is not longer using it, it releases. These can exist on the client side, but the server needs static ports.  




 