# Transport Layer

## Transport vs Network
1. Transportaion from one comp to another is done by network layer
2. The role of transport layer is to transport the data from the network to the application. 

**Multiplexing** - Transport layer has a multiplexer and demultiplexer. Each packet is given to a socket, which has a port.   

It also takes care of congestion control.  

**Checksums** - Each data has a checksum associated with it, this is calculated on both sides to check.
**Timers** - Once you send, a timer starts, if we get a recieveed from reciever, then timer stops, it we dont get, the timer expires. This means the packet was not delivered. This is called a retransmission timer.   
We also have sequence numbers, for each segment. This will avoid duplicates. These are random

## Protocols

## UDP 
1. User datagram protocol.
2. Data may not be delivered
3. Data may change on the way
4. Data may not be in order
5. Connectionless protocol - No connection will be established. 
6. UDP uses checksums, we can check if data is corrupted, but it doesnt do anything 
7. UDP is faster
8. Video conferencing
9. DNS uses UDP


### UDP Segment 
It has source and destination port number - 2+2
Length of datagram 2
Checksum 2
Data
header is 8 bytes

## TCP
1. Transmission Control Protocol
2. Application layer sends a lot of raw data. TCP segments this data.
3. Network layer sends small chunks. TCP stitches them together
4. Congestion Control.
5. Takes care of 
	1. When data does not arrive
	2. rearranges and maintains the order of data using seq numbers
6. HTTP, SMTP, IMAP, POP uses it
7. Connection - oriented
8. Error control
9. Bi directional (full duplex)

### Parts
1. s d port number
2. seq n
3. ack n
4. checksum
5. length of datagram

### 3 Way Handshake
1. Client sends a SYN flag
2. Server sends an SYN-ACK flag
3. Client sends back ACK flagged

ack no = prev_sq_no + 1
