# Network Layer
1. Transport - Segment
2. Network - Packet
3. Data Link - Frames

**Protocol** - IP

Here, we deal with routers

In simple transmission, there are so many interconnected routers. Each router has its own network address.  
These network addresses are in each routing tables. This process is called hop by hop forwarding.  
Forwarding table is insder routing table. Routing table has one path. Forwarding table has only one path.


## Control Plane
Control plane is used to build routing tables. There are two types of routing
1. Static Routing - manually add all routes
2. Dynamic Routing - dynamically adds routes. 

## IP
IPv4 - 32 Bit, 4 words  
IPv6 - 128 Bit, 16 words

**Subnetting** - Blocks of IP adresses. 
192.168.2.1
192.162.2 - netword address - subnet id  
.1 - device address - host id  
Router only needs subnet of the host.
There are different classes for IP -   
Class A - 0.0.0.0 - 127.255.255.255
Class B - 128.0.0.0 - 191.255.255.255
Class C - 192.0.0.0 - 223.255.255.255
Class D - 224.0.0.0 - 239.255.255.255
Class E - 240.0.0.0 - 255.255.255.255  

**Subnet Masking** 
It masks the network part and keeps the host ids for us to use.  
Variable length subnet - we can keep the variable part of the host id.  
12.0.0.0/24 - You have 32 bits, first 24 are occupied - rest 8 we have.  2\*\*8 - 256  
Loopback Addresses - your system acts as both client and server.  
Packets - 
header  - 20 bytes - ip version, length, flags, id_num, protocol, checksum, addresses, ttl, seq_no, etc.
TTL - Time to Live - since packets are hopping, after a particular number of hops, it dies. 

**IPv4 vs IPv6**
Cons of v6 - Not backward compatible, 
IPv6 - a:a:a:a:a:a:a:a - Each a is a 16 bit hexadecimal

## Middle Boxes
1. Firewall -  Stateless and Stateful
2. NAT - Network Address Translator - Creates private ids to accomodate routing and load balancing.  
